Most traditional style Chinese scholars have a wet dream: I will perform political reformation once I become the powerful "prime minister", the ceiling of an intellectual. So am I. To set up the background, I will roughly describe the political system in China (of course, the real world is much more complicated). In China, the political power is divided into imperial power and the governmental power (see *The Institutional Logic of Governance in China: An Organizational Approach, Xueguang Zhou*, for an interesting perspective). While a "prime minister" holds the latter, it is heavily limited by the first type of power, such that without the approval of the imperial power, nothing solid can be achieved. What a "prime minister" can do at most is to maximize the interest for both the imperial power and the "people" they speak for. 

As a student studying in the western world, I am always fascinated by the bottom-up approach for a political system. But I am never naive to think it will work instantly in China, where the whole logic is reversed. The logic of the ruling in China is highly consistent, and requires many historical coincidences for any small change. What I would think about is the closest next-step that works for the most: the need of changing, the "historical inertia", the people asking for freedom, the people preferring order, etc. The ultimate goal is to let the entire Chinese people acquire the imperial power, and supervise the government practicing governmental power. 

The reason to change, however, is still a pie in the sky. If you approach a waiter at a breakfast restaurant saying "please support my reformation of the Chinese government", you will either be thought as a fool, or be reported to the police station. Even worse, people who do not seem to have a bright future, like the so called "Sanhe Da Shen", might only look at you and your sad fate in indifference. I have heard of a study saying that the Chinese people are more risk averse. This not only causes them to be reluctant to change, but also makes them tend to seek jobs in the system (as a civil servant) after graduation, in order to enjoy a safe but controlled life. On the other side, the imperial power is like a "control freak". Every corner of the society needs to be reached. Discordant sound can only propagate inside the system. 

My solution for the next step, is surprisingly socialist. I would significantly increase the size of the system, by creating more welfare-based job positions, called studying civil servants. I will describe what the positions are like now. The admission procedure is similar to the civil service exam, but on testing your ability to study. When admitted, a life-long position is granted, conditioned on passing annual exams. The position is cohosted by a governmental organization and a local university, whose duties include working for the organization for 10h/week while studying (or researching) in the university for 10h/week. Of course, the salary will be so low that anyone in this position can only afford to rent and eat without other incomes. Any studying civil servants with excellent work/study evaluations can be transferred to formal positions in the organization (called working civil servants), and any working civil servants with low evaluations will be transferred to studying civil servants. There are no superiority of inferiority between the two jobs, and they can be regarded as different choices. The position of studying civil servants is best for many types of people: children in wealthy/powerful families who are wished to have peaceful lives, people who want to take risky side jobs, well-educated people who just want to "lie flat". In the least sense, during economic crisis, it is a perfect mechanism to house unemployed young people.

There are many assumptions behind the construction. First, there exist redundant staff in the current government who should be put in such positions; otherwise it is not cost-effective at all. Next, most people in this position will change, by either seeking transfer or by taking side jobs. Third, lifelong learning and working by civil servants improve the social efficiency. Fourth, even with minimal support, it is a good job for children of poor peasants to study for. There might be many other factors to consider, but the idea is clear. It can be regarded as an even more modern version of the imperial examination system: more intellectuals will be included, reducing the risk of revolution that the government is scared of. On the other side, more thoughts will be bounced inside the system, forming an indirect bottom-up path of influence. 

I am also not selfless to create an authoritarian giant for free. There are many underlying benefits. It creates evaluation methods for civil servants without hurting the system too much, which improves responsibility of the government. It creates a class of people who are able to take side jobs without the fear of starvation. Out of them, writers, philosophers, late boomers, ... might appear, potentially building a more prosperous folk culture that China currently lacks. Is the system closer to or farther from our ultimate goal? My theory is that the current Chinese system only attracts synchronized people, so it only speaks for the synchronized people. People like me are never born to be interested in the positions with heavy connections to the government. But people like me may become freelancers in the society at some point, and a welfare-based position would be quite attractive. If people with different minds build up a system, it could be influenced by anyone. If it could be influenced by anyone, it should speak for everyone. 

Probably you can see the gap now. How, in the first place, is government supervised or influenced by people? The last piece of the puzzle is solved by the engagement of governmental jobs. The studying civil servants will be the first witnesses of important events. They will be the group of people that gives the evaluations for working civil servants. At the same time, they will also be learning about high level theories from the university. What they research and propose in their own times matter a lot to the future of the society. Their thoughts should never be excluded from important internal meetings that happen everyday and everywhere in China.

I am only one of the traditional style Chinese intellectuals who theorize their perspectives of the society. You may find it interesting. You may not. My only hope is that it is not a waste of your time to read until this point. Thank you!