People have been saying that you can never imagine something you have never seen. I only partly agree. There must be inventions in the future that I will not be able to see, but they will be eventually invented by humans. People in the 19th century may imagine humans flying like birds, but they are limited by what they see. Wise-enough people in the 19th century might depict humans sitting in a chamber flying across the Atlantic, which makes more sense. We will never know for sure if such people exist, but with all the possibilities that people imagine about, there must be one closest to the reality.

It is 2024 now. People are still imagining about the future. In my early ages, I have been asking myself: who am I? It is an endless question without an exclusive answer. The lunatic me responded: you are the mad scientist that will invent time travel and achieve partial-immortality in the future and that travels back to an innocent boy's body in history to keep immortality. The description seems too informative to digest, but there are two key words: time travel and immortal. I will explain what they truly are.

As people can't easily fly like a bird, I suppose it will also be hard to teleport people across time. Also, people can not change the history, nor the future. What humans might do, is to reconstruct the history, based on the records in the universe. This starts to sound quite boring, but I am thinking of an industry to let historians make money. 100 years later, the subject of history is developed with the help of many modern technologies. It is so advanced that, with the help of an AI playwright, you can generate a lifelong story for anyone in history given their records. Furthermore, an AR device is invented such that given the story, anyone can experience the life immersively, while forgetting about your real life. You may be interested in the story of your grand-grand-grandparents, or an important historical figure, or just a random innocent boy that only has several marks. When you are experiencing events in history, aren't you time traveling? 

What is the goal of immortality? Emperors want to stay in power as long as possible, but they are not important. For ordinary people, we just wish to experience the world as much as possible. Given the limited time of human body, the more we experience per hour, the longer we actually live. What if, with the above AR device, we are able to experience the entire life of someone, in 1 hour? This means that if we want, we can live at least 10 lives, in one day. This also does not come from pure imagination. I have heard that different species experience time with different speed. The AR device will be able to set our speeds to minimum, such that we are able to see much more while sitting in the chair. 

The above thoughts are highly likely to coincide with other people. I will be glad to hear about it. What I want to point out is that time travel and immortal can be closer than we thought, if people examine what have been achieved in scrutiny. 